# Part 1. Mathematics through the Ages
<center> Text 1. Counting in the Early Ages *</center>
Counting is the oldest of all processes. It goes back to the very dawn of human history. At all times and practically in all places, people had to think of supplies of food, clothing and shelter. There was often not enough food or other things. So, even the most primitive people were always forced to think of how many there were, how much food and clothing they possessed, and how long those things would last. These questions could be answered only by counting and measuring.
How did people count in the dim and distant past, especially when they spoke different languages? Suppose you wanted to buy a chicken from some poor savage tribe. You might point toward some chickens and then hold up one finger. Or, instead of this, you might put one pebble or one stick on the ground. At the same time, you might make a sound in your throat, something like ___ung___, and the savages would understand that you wanted to buy one chicken.
But suppose you wanted to buy two chickens or three bananas, what would you do? It would not be hard to make a sign for the number two. You could show two fingers or point to two shoes to two pebbles, or to two sticks.
For three you could use three fingers or three pebbles, or three sticks. You see that even though you and the savages could not talk to one another, you could easily make the numbers one, two, and three known. It is a curious fact that much of the story of the world begins right here.
Have you ever tried to imagine what the world would be like if no one had ever learned how to count or how to write numerals? We are so in habit of using numbers that we rarely think of how important they are to us.
For example, when we open our eyes in the morning, we are likely, first of all, to look at the clock, to see whether it is time to get up. But if people had never learned to count, there would be no clocks. We would know nothing of hours or minutes, or seconds. We could tell time only by the position of the sun or the moon in the sky; we could not know the exact time under the best conditions, and in stormy weather, we could only guess whether it was morning or noon, or night.
The clothes we wear, the houses we live in, and the food we eat, all would be different if people had not learned how to use numbers. We dress in the morning without stopping to think that the materials of which our clothing is made have been woven on machines adjusted to a fraction of an inch. The number and height and width of the stair steps of which we walk were carefully calculated before the house was built. In preparing breakfast, we measure so many cups of cereal to so many cups of water; we count the minutes it takes to boil eggs, or make the coffee.
When we leave the house, we take money for bus fare unless we walk and for lunch unless we take it with us; but if people could not count, there would be no money. All day All day long, we either use numbers ourselves or use things that other people have made by using numbers.
It has taken people thousands of years to learn how to use numbers, or the written figures, which we call numerals. For a long time after men began to be civilized, such simple numbers as two and three were all they needed. For larger numbers, they used words in their various languages which correspond to expressions, such as lots of people, a heap of apples, a school of fish, and a flock of sheep. For example, a study of thirty Australian languages showed no number above four, and in many of these languages there were number names for only one and two, the larger numbers being expressed simply as much and many.
You must have heard about the numerals, or number figures, called digits. The Latin word digit means fingers. Because we have give fingers on each hand, people began, after many centuries, to cunt by fives. Later, they started counting by tens, using fingers on both hands.
Because we have ten toes as well as ten fingers, people counted fingers and toes together and used a number scale of twenty. In the English language, the sentence "The days of a man's life are three score years and ten" the word score means twenty (so, the life span of humans was considered to be seventy).
Number names were among the first words used when people began to speak. The numbers from one to ten sound alike in many languages




